feat: configure Segment plugin to be able to send data to Red Hat (enabled by default) (#1028)
janus-idp/backstage-showcase: showcase-docs/getting-started.md

There are several different methods for running the Backstage Showcase app today. We currently have support for running the application locally, using a helm chart to deploy to a cluster, and manifests for deployment using ArgoCD.

## Telemetry collection

The telemetry data collection feature is used to enhance your experience with the application without compromising your privacy. To enable or disable telemetry data collection, you can configure the [`@janus-idp/backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment`](https://github.com/janus-idp/backstage-plugins/tree/main/plugins/analytics-provider-segment) plugin accordingly.

- **Anonymous configuration**:

  - IP addresses are anonymized (`maskIP: true`), and recorded as `0.0.0.0`.
  - `anonymousId` used for tracking is a hash derived from the user's username.

- **Data Collection Overview**:
  - **Events Tracked**: Page visits, clicks on links or buttons.
  - **Common Data Points for All Events**:

>     - User-related info: Locale, timezone, userAgent (browser and OS details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - User-related info: locale, timezone, userAgent (browser and OS details).
```

>     - Page-related info: Title, Category, Extension name, URL, path, referrer, search parameters.

Reviewer: should these all be lowercase? 

```suggestion
    - Page-related info: title, category, extension name, URL, path, referrer, search parameters.
```

The telemetry data will only be used for internal analysis and product improvements. The collected data is analyzed to understand user interactions with the application while maintaining user anonymity and privacy.

To enable or disable telemetry data collection and customize a telemetry destination, see the following sections.

### Enable Telemetry

To turn on the telemetry feature, you must enable the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin either using the Helm Chart or the RHDH Operator.

> 

Reviewer 2: We need just 2 notes, one in this section and other in the disable telemetry section. 

Note suggestion for the Enable telemetry section
If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your Helm configuration file or ConfigMap file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `false` to quickly start telemetry data collection.

Note suggestion for the disable telemetry section
If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your Helm configuration file or ConfigMap file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true` to quickly stop telemetry data collection.

Author: added

#### Using Helm Chart

Add the following code in your Helm configuration file:

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: false
```

NOTE: If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your Helm configuration file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true`.

#### Using RHDH Operator

> If you have created the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh` ConfigMap file as described in the [Configuring dynamic plugins with the Red Hat Developer Hub Operator](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.1/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#configuring-dynamic-plugins-with-the-red-hat-developer-hub-operator) section, add the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin to the list of plugins and set the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have created the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh` ConfigMap file as described in the [Configuring dynamic plugins with the Red Hat Developer Hub Operator](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_developer_hub/1.1/html-single/administration_guide_for_red_hat_developer_hub/index#configuring-dynamic-plugins-with-the-red-hat-developer-hub-operator) section, add the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin to the list of plugins and set the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true` to disable telemetry, or `false` to enable it.
```

If you have not created the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh` ConfigMap file, create it with the following content:

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: dynamic-plugins-rhdh
data:
  dynamic-plugins.yaml: |
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: false
```

> NOTE: If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your ConfigMap file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true`.

Reviewer: It seems we mention this twice? 

```suggestion
NOTE: If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your ConfigMap file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true` to disable telemetry, or `false` to enable it.
```

When using RHDH Operator, you must modify the `ConfigMap` file created for dynamic plugin configuration. You specify the name of this `ConfigMap` file in the `dynamicPluginsConfigMapName` field of your `Backstage` custom resource. Usually, the `ConfigMap` file is named as `dynamic-plugins-rhdh`.
Add the following code in your `ConfigMap` file:

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: dynamic-plugins-rhdh
data:
  dynamic-plugins.yaml: |
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: true
```

### Disable Telemetry for Local Development

By default, the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is disabled when you run your application locally without using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file.
However, if you run your application using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file, you can disable the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin as shown in the following example:

```yaml
dynamicPlugins:
  plugins:
    - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
      disabled: true
```

> Delete the `dynamic-plugins-root/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment` plugin directory.

Reviewer: is this a second step, or an alternative step to the above configuration change?

Author: Second step. Do you think I should use numbered list to make it clearer?

Author: updarted

If you don't have the `dynamic-plugins-rhdh` ConfigMap, you can create it with the following content:

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: dynamic-plugins-rhdh
data:
  dynamic-plugins.yaml: |
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: false
```

Don't forget to add `dynamicPluginsConfigMapName` referencing the above `ConfigMap` to your `Backstage` resource:

```yaml
spec:
  application:
    dynamicPluginsConfigMapName: dynamic-plugins-rhdh
```

### Customizing Telemetry Destination

By default, the Segment plugin is configured to send data to Red Hat. If you wish to change the destination, you can do so by setting the `SEGMENT_WRITE_KEY` environment variable to the desired Segment write key.

#### When using Helm Chart

Add the following configuration to your

```yaml
upstream:
  backstage:
    extraEnvVars:
      - name: SEGMENT_WRITE_KEY
        value: <segment_key>
```

#### When using RHDH Operator

```yaml
extraEnvs:
  envs:
    - name: SEGMENT_WRITE_KEY
      value: <segment_key>
```

> If you wish to subsequently disable telemetry data collection, use one of the following methods described below.

Author: This is a sentence that was added by the legal team. I think that we should keep it.

> If you wish to subsequently disable telemetry data collection, use one of the following methods described below.

Reviewer: should this be under the `Example using RHDH Operator` section?

### Disable Telemetry

To turn off Segment telemetry, you need to deactivate the Segment provider plugin

#### Using Helm Chart

> When you are using Helm Chart, you need to modify Helm values by adding the following configuration (if the Segment plugin is already present in your configuration, you can just change `disabled: false` to `disabled: true`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following code in your Helm configuration file:
```

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: true
```

> 

Reviewer 2: NOTE: If the `analytics-provider-segment`  plugin is already present in your Helm configuration file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true`.

> #### When using RHDH Operator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Using RHDH Operator
```

> When using RHDH Operator, you need to modify the ConfigMaps used for dynamic plugin configuration. The name of this ConfigMap is specified in `dynamicPluginsConfigMapName` field in your `Backstage` CustomResource.
> Usually, it is named as `dynamic-plugins-rhdh`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using RHDH Operator, you must modify the `ConfigMap` file created for dynamic plugin configuration. You specify the name of this `ConfigMap` file in the `dynamicPluginsConfigMapName` field of your `Backstage` custom resource. Usually, the `ConfigMap` file is named as `dynamic-plugins-rhdh`.
```

> To disable Segment provider plugin, add the following configuration (if the Segment plugin is already present in your configuration, you can just change `disabled: false` to `disabled: true`):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the following code in your `ConfigMap` file:
```

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: dynamic-plugins-rhdh
data:
  dynamic-plugins.yaml: |
    includes:
      - dynamic-plugins.default.yaml
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: true
```

> 

Reviewer 2: NOTE: If the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is already present in your `ConfigMap` file, set the value of the `plugins.disabled` parameter to `true`.

### Disable Telemetry for Local Development

> When running locally without using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file, the Segment plugin is not activated by default.
> However, if your configuration is based on `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml`, you can disable the Segment plugin by adding the below lines to your configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin is disabled when you run your application locally without using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file.
However, if you run your application using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file, you can disable the `analytics-provider-segment` plugin as shown in the following example:
```

```yaml
dynamicPlugins:
  plugins:
    - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
      disabled: true
```

> Afterward, remove the Segment plugin directory by deleting `dynamic-plugins-root/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Delete the `dynamic-plugins-root/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment` plugin directory.
```

### Disabling Telemetry in Continuous Integration (CI) Environments

> To disable telemetry while running Backstage in a CI environment, set the `SEGMENT_TEST_MODE` environment variable to `true`. This action deactivates telemetry transmissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable telemetry while running Backstage in a CI environment, set the value of the `SEGMENT_TEST_MODE` environment variable to `true`. This action deactivates telemetry transmissions.
```

- **Anonymized-focused configuration**:

  - IP addresses are anonymized (`maskIP: true`), and recorded as `0.0.0.0`.
  - `anonymousId` used for tracking is a hash derived from the user's username.

- **Data Collection Overview**:
  - **Events Tracked**: Page visits, clicks on links or buttons.
  - **Common Data Points for All Events**:
    - User-related info: Locale, timezone, userAgent (browser and OS details).
    - Page-related info: Title, Category, Extension name, URL, path, referrer, search parameters.

This ensures a thorough understanding of user interactions with the application while maintaining user anonymity and privacy.

The data will be used only for internal analysis and product improvement.

If you wish to enable telemetry data collection, follow the steps below.

### Enable Telemetry Using Helm Chart

To turn on the telemetry while using the Helm chart, you need to enable Segment provider plugin in your Helm `values.yaml` file by adding the following configuration:

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: false

> ```

Reviewer 2: Just for clarity: does the user need to add the entire YAML code or just need to edit the value of the `disabled` parameter?

Author: user needs to add the
```
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: false
``` 
into `plugins` section, which will mostly likely already exist as it is part of the default configuration

```

If you wish to subsequently disable telemetry data collection, use one of the following methods described below.

### Disable Telemetry Using Helm Chart

To turn off Segment telemetry while using the Helm chart, you need to deactivate the Segment provider plugin in your Helm `values.yaml` file by adding the following configuration:

```yaml
global:
  dynamic:
    plugins:
      - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
        disabled: true
```

### Disable Telemetry for Local Development

When running locally without using the `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml` file, the Segment plugin is not activated by default.
However, if your configuration is based on `dynamic-plugins.default.yaml`, you can disable the Segment plugin by adding the below lines to your configuration file:

```yaml
dynamicPlugins:
  plugins:
    - package: './dynamic-plugins/dist/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment'
      disabled: true
```

Afterward, remove the Segment plugin directory by deleting `dynamic-plugins-root/janus-idp-backstage-plugin-analytics-provider-segment`

### Disabling Telemetry in Continuous Integration (CI) Environments

> To disable telemetry while running Backstage in a CI environment, set the `SEGMENT_TEST_MODE` environment variable to `true`. This action deactivates telemetry transmissions.

Reviewer 2: @kadel, Can we mention the file name in which we have to set this environmet variable?

Author: This depends on what CI system is used. For some CI systems, it will be in a file. For others, this could be somewhere in the web UI. People running this in CI will know where to configure this in their system
